.TH PBUILD-AI 1 "2026-06-25" "pbuild-ai 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
pbuild\-ai \- AI-powered RPM package builder and fixer for openSUSE
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pbuild\-ai
[\fI\,OPTIONS\/\fR] \fI\,workspace_dir\/\fR [\fI\,package_name\/\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
pbuild\-ai is an AI helper for the \fBpbuild\fR(1) tool.
It works on single packages or entire package sets and is designed to
work with all RPM package formats. It connects to an Ollama server to
analyze spec files, diagnose build failures, and apply fixes.

The main functionality is:
.IP \(bu 4
Analyze package sources (\fB\-\-analyze\fR; this is the default)
.IP \(bu 4
Modify sources from a natural-language prompt (\fB\-\-modify\fR)
.IP \(bu 4
Run builds and fix possible build failures (\fB\-\-fix\fR)
.IP \(bu 4
Update sources to the latest upstream version and verify (\fB\-\-update\fR)
.IP \(bu 4
Generate a new package from scratch (\fB\-\-generate\fR / \fB\-\-create\fR)

pbuild\-ai is safe by default \(en it only allows modifications to local
package sources. Reading files outside the working directory is blocked.
Push operations are forbidden.

The tool is designed around git-based projects or single packages, but
does not depend on git. However, git is useful for reviewing and
exchanging changes.

Since the tool could run indefinitely, it is recommended to use AI
servers with a fixed-cost plan \(en ideally a local instance on your own
hardware.

While waiting for the AI server, downloads, or builds, pbuild\-ai shows
a colored spinner on stderr (\fB[AI]\fR in cyan, \fB[BUILD]\fR in yellow,
\fB[TOOL]\fR in green) to indicate activity. The spinner is disabled
when stderr is not a terminal, or when \fBNO_SPINNER\fR or
\fBNO_COLOR\fR is set.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B workspace_dir
Path to the working directory containing the package sources.
.TP
.B package_name
Package name to focus on (only in project mode when a \fI_manifest\fR file is present).
.TP
.B \-\-fix, \-f
Apply suggested changes and run a test build to verify the fix.
Repeats up to \fI\-\-max-fix-attempts\fR times per package.
Conflicts with \fB\-\-analyze\fR and \fB\-\-changelog\fR.
In project mode (\fI_manifest\fR present), the full package set is built
on each attempt. pbuild calculates which packages need rebuilding and only
rebuilds changed and depending ones. When a package fails, only that one
is fixed, then the set is built again to verify.
.TP
.B \-\-analyze, \-a
Analyze spec files and exit. No build is performed. This is the default
behavior when no other option is given.
Conflicts with \fB\-\-fix\fR, \fB\-\-update\fR, \fB\-\-generate\fR,
\fB\-\-changelog\fR, and \fB\-\-modify\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-changelog
Prepend a changelog entry for the current version in the \fI.changes\fR file,
then exit. No build or research is performed.
Conflicts with \fB\-\-fix\fR and \fB\-\-analyze\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-update, \-u
Update to the latest upstream version. Also enables \fB\-\-fix\fR.
Use \fB\-\-update=VERSION\fR to specify a concrete version.
Without \fI=VERSION\fR, the tool researches the upstream project via
web fetch to discover the latest stable release.
In project mode (\fI_manifest\fR present), only packages whose version
was actually updated are rebuilt. Unchanged packages are skipped.
.TP
.B \-\-update\-only
Update sources to the latest upstream version, then exit without
building. Use \fB\-\-update\-only=VERSION\fR to specify a concrete
version. Does not enable \fB\-\-fix\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-modify PROMPT, \-m PROMPT
Modify package sources by sending the prompt and current sources to
Ollama, then apply the changes locally and quit (no build).
Combine with \fB\-\-fix\fR to also test-build and fix after the modification.
.TP
.B \-\-generate PROMPT, \-\-create PROMPT
Create a new openSUSE RPM package from scratch. \fB\-\-create\fR is an
alias for \fB\-\-generate\fR. The given prompt describes what to package.
pbuild\-ai researches upstream sources via web fetch, asks clarifying
questions, writes spec files and supporting files into the workspace
directory.
Combine with \fB\-\-fix\fP to automatically test-build and fix failures
after generation. Without \fB\-\-fix\fP, no build is performed.
.TP
.B \-\-deep\-analyze, \-d
On build failure, open an interactive shell in the build environment
for manual investigation. If a fix is applied, changes are exported as
a patch file and the spec file is updated to include it.
This mode may be triggered automatically when the AI is unsure about
the cause of an error.
.TP
.B \-\-prompt HINT, \-p HINT
Additional hint to include in all analysis prompts sent to Ollama.
Used alongside \fB\-\-fix\fR or \fB\-\-modify\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-buildlog, \-L
Show the pbuild build log output on the console while building.
.TP
.B \-\-build\-log FILE
Write the full pbuild build log (stdout + stderr, unfiltered) to this
file. Written on both success and failure, overwriting any previous
content. Useful for offline analysis or CI pipelines.
.TP
.B \-\-root ROOT
Root directory for pbuild (passed as \fB\-\-root\fR to pbuild).
.TP
.B \-\-shell\-after\-build
Open a shell in the build environment on failure for debugging.
.TP
.B \-\-vm\-type TYPE
VM type for pbuild (e.g., \fBkvm\fR, \fBqemu\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-vm\-memory MEMORY
VM memory for pbuild (e.g., \fB4096\fR).
.TP
.B \-\-preset PRESET
Preset name to pass to pbuild.
.TP
.B \-\-allow\-tool\-scripts
Allow execution of scripts from \fItool-scripts/\fR in the workspace.
.TP
.B \-\-max\-fix\-attempts N
Max fix retry attempts per package (default: 10, 0 = unlimited).
.TP
.B \-\-max\-ai\-rounds N
Max AI tool-call rounds per fix attempt (default: 15, 0 = unlimited).
This controls how many times the AI can call tools (read, edit, write)
within a single fix cycle before moving on.
.TP
.B \-\-clean
Clean build artifacts before building.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-clean
Do not clean build artifacts (default).
.TP
.B \-\-interactive, \-i
Ask the user to select which changes to apply when Ollama proposes
multiple tool calls.
.TP
.B \-\-debug, \-D
Print raw JSON responses from Ollama for debugging, along with
request/response timings.
.TP
.B \-\-openai\-server URL
OpenAI-compatible server URL. Overrides the \fBOLLAMA_HOST\fR environment variable.
Defaults to \fBhttp://localhost:11434\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-model NAME
Ollama model name. Overrides the \fBOLLAMA_MODEL\fR environment variable.
Default: \fBdefault\fR (server-defined fallback).
.TP
.B \-\-ollama\-option KEY=VALUE
Pass a model parameter to Ollama (repeatable). Common keys:
\fBtemperature\fR (creativity, default ~0.7), \fBnum_ctx\fR (context window
size, e.g. 8192), \fBnum_predict\fR (max output tokens),
\fBtop_p\fR, \fBseed\fR, \fBstop\fR.
For reasoning/thinking models, use \fBthinking=false\fR to disable
thinking.
Example: \fB\-\-ollama\-option temperature=0.1 \-\-ollama\-option num_ctx=16384\fR.
Values are coerced: floats for strings containing \fB.\fR, ints for
integer-like strings, booleans for \fBtrue\fR/\fBfalse\fR/\fByes\fR/\fBno\fR.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B OLLAMA_HOST
Ollama server URL. Overridden by \fB\-\-openai\-server\fR.
Default: \fBhttp://localhost:11434\fR.
.TP
.B OLLAMA_MODEL
Ollama model name. Overridden by \fB\-\-model\fR.
Default: \fBdefault\fR (server-defined fallback).
.TP
.B NO_SPINNER
Set to \fB1\fR, \fBtrue\fR, or \fByes\fR to disable the activity spinner
on stderr.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Set to \fB1\fR, \fBtrue\fR, or \fByes\fR to disable colored output
(also disables the spinner colors).
.TP
.B GITHUB_TOKEN
GitHub personal access token. When set, all API requests to
\fBapi.github.com\fR include a Bearer authorization header,
increasing the rate limit from 60 to 5000 requests per hour.
.TP
.B GH_TOKEN
Alternative to \fBGITHUB_TOKEN\fR for GitHub API authentication.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Analyze a single package:
pbuild\-ai bc
.TP
Explicitly analyze with \fB\-\-analyze\fR:
pbuild\-ai \-\-analyze bc
.TP
Prepend a changelog entry for the current version:
pbuild\-ai \-\-changelog bc
.TP
Test-build and auto-fix:
pbuild\-ai \-\-fix bc
.TP
Update to latest upstream version:
pbuild\-ai \-\-update bc
.TP
Update to a specific version:
pbuild\-ai \-\-update=1.2.3 bc
.TP
Update sources to latest version without building:
pbuild\-ai \-\-update\-only bc
.TP
Update sources to a specific version without building:
pbuild\-ai \-\-update\-only=1.2.3 bc
.TP
Generate a new package and test-build it:
pbuild\-ai \-\-generate https://github.com/atom/atom/archive/refs/tags/v1.60.0.tar.gz \-\-fix .
.TP
Modify sources with a prompt and test-build:
pbuild\-ai \-\-modify "switch to systemd service" \-\-fix bc
.TP
Build all packages in a project:
pbuild\-ai \-\-all .
.TP
Build with a custom Ollama model:
pbuild\-ai \-\-model llama3 bc
.TP
Build with low temperature for more deterministic fixes and larger context:
pbuild\-ai \-\-fix bc \-\-ollama\-option temperature=0.1 \-\-ollama\-option num_ctx=16384
.TP
Disable thinking mode (for models that support it):
pbuild\-ai \-\-fix bc \-\-ollama\-option thinking=false
.SH AGENTS.md
Your package or project may contain an \fIAGENTS.md\fR file to give hints
on how to process or update. Packages listed there under a "skip" rule
are excluded from the build loop.

Example:
.RS
skip: package-a, package-b, package-c
.RE

Lines matching \fBskip\fR (case-insensitive) are parsed for a
comma-separated list of package names to exclude from building.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I _manifest
Project manifest file. When present, enables project mode and all
packages listed in it are built together.
.TP
.I _pbuild
Repository configuration for project mode. Defines which repositories
to build against.
.TP
.I AGENTS.md
Optional hints file for build order, skip rules, and tool scripts.
.TP
.I tool-scripts/
Optional directory with custom scripts that can be invoked by the AI.
Requires \fB\-\-allow\-tool\-scripts\fR.
.SH SECURITY
pbuild\-ai enforces a defined set of rules that only allow local
modifications of the package sources. By default, it only calls tools
that are safe for your system. Reading any file outside the working
directory is blocked.

The following restrictions apply:
.IP \(bu 4
File reads and writes are confined to the workspace directory.
.IP \(bu 4
Only safe HTTPS URLs are allowed; \fBfile://\fR and private IPs are blocked.
.IP \(bu 4
Git push is forbidden; only local operations (clone, add, diff, log, status) are permitted.
.IP \(bu 4
\fItool-scripts/\fR execution requires \fB\-\-allow\-tool\-scripts\fR.
.IP \(bu 4
Copyright headers in spec files are preserved automatically.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode/issues
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pbuild (1)
